= Logging
:experimental:

Cider Log Mode allows you to capture, view and inspect log events
emitted by Java logging frameworks. The captured log events can be
searched, viewed in the Cider Inspector and Debugger and streamed to
clients.

image::cider-log.png[CIDER Log]

== Usage

To use Cider Log Mode, type kbd:[C-c l l] (`cider-log`) in any buffer
that has a Cider https://github.com/vspinu/sesman[Sesman] session
attached to it. The first time you run the command, it will prompt you
to select a log framework to use, and then attach a log appender to
the root logger of the selected framework. After the log appender has
been attached, the `cider-log` command will show a
https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_mono/transient.html[Transient]
menu, from which you can take further actions, like managing the log
framework, appenders, consumers and events.

To view log events and stream them to your client, type kbd:[es]
(Search log events) followed by kbd:[s]. This will open the
`*cider-log*` buffer showing any log events captured thus far. It will
also add a log consumer to this buffer, which receives newly-arriving
log events.

Note that the `*cider-log*` buffer might initially be empty, and you
may see a `No log events found.` message. This is because nothing has
been logged between adding the appender and searching for events. So,
now would be a good time to run some code that triggers a log event
for the selected framework.

== Log Appender

A log appender can be attached to a logger of a log framework. Once
the appender is attached to a logger it captures the log events for
the

== Log Consumer

== Keybindings

|===
| Command | Keyboard shortcut | Description

| `cider-log`
| kbd:[C-c l l]
| Show the Cider log menu.

| `cider-log-appender`
| kbd:[C-c l a]
| Show the menu to manage appenders of a logging framework.

| `cider-log-consumer`
| kbd:[C-c l c]
| Show the menu to manage consumers listening to log events.

| `cider-log-event`
| kbd:[C-c l e]
| Show the menu to manage log events.
|===

== Supported log frameworks

Cider Log Mode supports log frameworks that allow reconfiguration at
run time. More specifically the framework should support attaching log
appenders to loggers, in order to capture events.

At the moment the following log frameworks are supported:

- https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/19/core/java-logging-overview.html[Java Util Logging]
- https://logback.qos.ch[Logback]

There is some work in progress to support
https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/[Log4j] as well, but there are
some https://stackoverflow.com/a/17842174/12711900[difficulties] with
configuration changes made at runtime, which are wiped out by the
Log4j2's reconfiguration mechanism.
